Allow extensions and users to customize easily toolbar items. (#10469)
jupyterlab/jupyterlab: docs/source/extension/extension_points.rst

.. _widget-tracker:

Toolbar Registry
----------------

As for the context menu and the main menu bar, JupyterLab provides an infrastructure to define

> and customized toolbar widgets of document widgets from the settings. A typical example is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and customize toolbar widgets of document widgets from the settings. A typical example is
```

> As for the context menu and the main menu bar, JupyterLab provides an infrastructure to define
> and customize toolbar widgets of document widgets from the settings. A typical example is
> the notebook toolbar as seen in the snippet below:

Reviewer: Just a suggestion on making it easier to understand on first read.

```suggestion
JupyterLab provides an infrastructure to define and customize toolbar widgets of document
widgets from the settings, which is similar to that defining the context menu and the main menu
bar. A typical example is the notebook toolbar as in the snippet below:
```

Reviewer: Another thought: should "document widgets" be replaced with "`DocumentWidget`s" to make it easier to understand? It might help, but I am not 100% sure if it helps or not.

Author: As _document widget_ is not an official term, your suggestion is great. So developers get a hint to look for that word in the code base if they are not aware of that widget type.

     
       if (settingRegistry) {
         // Create the factory
         toolbarFactory = createToolbarFactory(
           toolbarRegistry,
           settingRegistry,
           // Factory name
           FACTORY,
           // Setting id in which the toolbar items are defined
           '@jupyterlab/notebook-extension:panel',
           translator
         );
       }
     }
   
     const factory = new NotebookWidgetFactory({
       name: FACTORY,
       fileTypes: ['notebook'],
       modelName: 'notebook',
       defaultFor: ['notebook'],
       // ...
       toolbarFactory,
       translator: translator
     });
     app.docRegistry.addWidgetFactory(factory);

The registry ``registerFactory`` method allows an extension to provide special widget for a unique pair 
(factory name, toolbar item name). Then the helper ``createToolbarFactory`` can be used to extract the
toolbar definition from the settings and build the factory to pass to the widget factory.

The default toolbar items can be defined across multiple extensions by providing an entry in the ``"jupyter.lab.toolbars"``
mapping. For example for the notebook panel:

.. code:: json
 
   "jupyter.lab.toolbars": {

>      "Notebook": [

Reviewer: Is the key (`"Notebook"`)  meaningful, or can it be anything? I would not know after reading the docs only.

Author: Indeed it is relevant as this should match the unique widget factory name. I'll update the example.

       { "name": "save", "rank": 10 },
       { "name": "insert", "command": "notebook:insert-cell-below", "rank": 20 },
       { "name": "cut", "command": "notebook:cut-cell", "rank": 21 },
       { "name": "copy", "command": "notebook:copy-cell", "rank": 22 },
       { "name": "paste", "command": "notebook:paste-cell-below", "rank": 23 },
       { "name": "run", "command": "runmenu:run", "rank": 30 },
       { "name": "interrupt", "command": "kernelmenu:interrupt", "rank": 31 },
       { "name": "restart", "command": "kernelmenu:restart", "rank": 32 },
       {
         "name": "restart-and-run",
         "command": "runmenu:restart-and-run-all",
         "rank": 33
       },
       { "name": "cellType", "rank": 40 },
       { "name": "spacer", "type": "spacer", "rank": 100 },
       { "name": "kernelName", "rank": 1000 },
       { "name": "kernelStatus", "rank": 1001 }
     ]
   },
   "jupyter.lab.transform": true,
   "properties": {
     "toolbar": {
       "title": "Notebook panel toolbar items",
       "items": {
         "$ref": "#/definitions/toolbarItem"
       },
       "type": "array",
       "default": []
     }
   }

> The settings registry will gather those definition within the provided setting plugin id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The settings registry will gather those definitions within the provided setting plugin id
```

Reviewer: I am having difficulty understanding what `setting plugin id` refers to in this and following sentences.

Author: This is indeed a not easy explanation. 

As for the shortcuts any extension can define a `jupyter.lab.toolbars`, the final aggregated list is built and set as default value on a `toolbar` property in a setting plugin example `@jupyterlab/notebook-extension:panel`. This then allow the user to override the toolbar definition. 

If you find a better way to explain this, that would be great.

Reviewer: Ok, I get it now so it refers to the ID passed to `createToolbarFactory`.

> under the ``toolbar`` property. That list will be used to create the toolbar. And the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
under the ``toolbar`` property. That list will be used to create the toolbar. The user
```

> The settings registry will gather those definitions within the provided setting plugin id
> under the ``toolbar`` property. That list will be used to create the toolbar. The user
> can customize it by adding new items or overriding existing one (like providing a different
> rank or add ``"disabled": true`` to remove the item).

Reviewer: This is what I understood, I hope it makes it clearer. Please edit to correct if not accurate or apply stylistic changes as suits you.

```suggestion
The settings registry will merge those definitions from settings schema with any
user-provided overrides (customization) transparently and save them under the
``toolbar`` property in the final settings object. The ``toolbar`` list will be used to
create the toolbar. Both the source settings schema and the final settings object
are identified by the plugin ID passed to ``createToolbarFactory``. The user can
customize the toolbar by adding new items or overriding existing ones (like
providing a different rank or adding ``"disabled": true`` to remove the item).
```

Author: Thanks a lot for taking the time to improve the documentation
